Here's the leather. It's calfskin.
It's fairly similar to what was on here in color,
although this was sheepskin.
We don't really use sheepskin
in binding anymore
because it deteriorates.
It just doesn't last,
plus it skins very easily,
it scuffs and skins and separates.
So this is a nice little piece of calfskin
that's made for bookbinding;
It's very stable.
Modern methods are used for the tanning.
It's vegetable tanned leather.
It's good for dampening and molding
into the form of a book cover.
As you see, the edges are are thinner—
paper-thin edges as opposed to
the relative thickness in the middle.
In these days they pared the leather
extremely thin all over,
so often the books would wear out
around the edges
and they would break down in the hinges.
So, today,
we use the leather a little bit heavier.
We don't pare it so much.
We only do this edge paring,
which you can see here.
[Student]: What do you use to pare it?
[Campbell]: A knife like this.
It's called a paring knife.
And a spoke shave. This one's been altered.
It has a wider opening.
But this is just a wood spoke shave.
And the shape of the blade
is a little bit different too,
and it's sharpened in a particular way.
And . . . it's just a matter of doing that.
And this is a matter
of just going along the edge
and paring it so that you have
a real nice bevel and very thin edge,
and it gets thinner
as it goes up toward the edge.
And I do that on glass or a stone
that we have that's special so that it won't
mark up the table or bang up the knife.
So I just wanted to show you those. Okay.
I'll put that away.
Now, the first thing I'll do
is dampen this leather
and this . . .
this allows you to mold the leather into shape.
It also helps the paste-
which we'll put on the other side-
absorb into the leather
so that the leather becomes sort of saturated
with the paste and. . . .
It's a wheat starch paste that I'm using.
And, I'll just keep that damp.
Here's the paste, here.
This is fairly sticky stuff.
It's more like a gelatinous kind of texture.
It doesn't have a lot of real tackiness,
like Elmer's glue
or some of the white PBA type of glues
that we use-polyvinyl acetate-
although you can mix this with that.
And this is used traditionally with leather . . .
. . . with paper
when you are pasting paper to something
this is more and more what's used.
I'll go ahead,
and as you see
we get it pretty well coated.
[Interviewer]: Harry, for Julia,
can you look up for a second?
[Campbell]: Right at you?
[Interviewer]: Yep. That's what she asked for.
[Campbell]: Oh, yeah, for the. . . .
[Interviewer]: Actually working. . . .
[Campbell]: Okay, how did that look?
If you need me to do that again. . . .
So right now I'm going to book this.
At least that's what they call it
in working with wallpaper.
I don't know if there is a term for it
in book binding.
Just gonna let that soak for a little bit.
Has anyone ever done wallpaper?
Get this a little wet.
[Interviewer]: Let's try another one.
Can you just sort of pause
and look up?
Good.
[Campbell]: I think I was blinking.
[Interviewer]: You were.
[Campbell]: Anytime you want me to do that,
let me know.
I'm just gonna
let that soak for a bit.
These are going to be used, obviously,
to assemble the case.
This will go in between those.
It will actually go on the spine.
It's not absolutely necessary since I have
a hollow lining on that,
but I like to give the spine
a little bit more substance [inaudible],
and often when you're making . . .
when you are doing a leather case binding,
it's easier to construct like a regular case.
Which, in fact is three pieces.
The same is true for that book
and most clothbound books. And this one,
although it was case-bound,
it was not done that way;
it had the leather . . .
it didn't have any kind of inlay strip like this
down the spine,
it just had the leather right to the spine.
I could do it that way, but, again,
it's going to be more flexible doing it
the way that I'm doing it with the hollow tube.
Also, in the head cap areas here
where the leather's turned over,
I'll put these little bits of. . . .
They're hard to see, but they're. . . .
It's a little linen twine,
I've rolled it in a little bit of adhesive
to give it some substance
and keep it all together.
But when I turn the leather over,
I'll put those in
at the top and the bottom of the spine
so that the leather forms a little cap.
Often books that are bound in leather . . .
they have some kind of decorative end band
at the top and the bottom of the spine,
and the leather is formed over that—
little caps are formed over that.
This book didn't have any bands and . . .
probably because of the type of book it was,
it would've just had the leather turned over
and some kind of head caps formed which. . . .
And if there had been any evidence of . . .
if there had been end bands
sewn on or pasted on
at some point, there would've been
some kind of evidence, and there wasn't really.
So I'm not putting any end bands on this book,
but I'm going to use these to make a little
. . . to give it a little shape
and form head caps.
And that's just cut out of that.
Okay. Usually I would do . . .
if I was doing a drawn-on leather binding,
and I was going to do a lot of shaping and. . . .
It's a lot more complicated
because the book is all in one piece,
and you've got to do the turn ends
and you've got to work in behind the spine
and get on the inside of the boards.
It's a little trickier,
and I would probably let it saturate
for a little bit longer,
but with this one
I'm not going to have to
do quite so much of that molding,
so I'm going to get this one ready to go now.
Another layer of paste.
Most often, working with leather,
I would work on a glass surface
or right on this Formica,
but but this'll be fine.
It shows up better
and you can see it a little bit easier
. . . what I'm doing.
Okay. I'm going to take the. . . .
I think I'll start with the center piece
and put it down
approximately in the center here.
[Interviewer]: You don't need to measure
or anything like that?
[Campbell]: What?
[Interviewer]: Do you just eyeball it?
[Campbell]: Just eyeball it, yeah.
That's one thing, you sort of learn
to trust your eyes as you go along, you know.
So, and then I'm going to need a bit of space
here right in the shoulder
of the joint area there,
and I've already kind of determined
how tightly I want the book . . .
those boards to sit up in there again,
a book like this . . . most case-bound books
have a joint right here.
You can see that okay?
Most leather-bound books, although not all,
have a tight joint,
where basically the board fits,
you know, and the leather
goes smooth right over that.
And what I do when I do a binding like this,
I don't form real hard shoulders,
just gently sort of sloping up,
and I don't try
to put the boards up too tight to them
when I make the binding.
It's going to look like a tight back,
but it will have a bit more flexibility
in the joint.
So, I've got this down here.
I'll let that sit there for a minute.
I'll take the back board.
Let's look at this leather one more time.
I guess it doesn't make much difference.
Sometimes there are flaws in the leather
and you put them on the back.
Or if you're going to be doing some tooling
or you have the spine a certain way
and, you know,
you want to kind of pay attention
to what the leather looks like on the outside.
So I'm going to just place that board,
approximately there,
which is about 3/16 of an inch-
in case you're interested in
the actual distance-
and place the front board there.
And you'll notice
I put those back-cornered corners
right here and there.
I'm assuming that's going to fit okay.
Give it a little test.
That should be fine.
I'll get them a little closer.
I'm going to lay these little bits of twine
right there and there.
Hopefully they're not so small
that they roll underneath the inlay strip
or get lost in there, because they're pretty thin.
I didn't want to make
a real big substantial head cap.
This one's pretty small and more delicate.
Okay. Now the . . .
now that I got those there. . . .
Put a new scalpel blade in here.
Because I want that to be really sharp.
Basically, I'm going to cut these corners off
at a 45º angle and start
turning in all this leather.
But . . . you'll see.
I'll come back to the corners.
Is it in the way
if I'm putting my hand here like that?
Okay.
I'm cutting at an angle
so that it will have the little bevel cut
there you can see.
Like I said,
I'm going to come back to that
and refine that as I go along,
as I start turning them in.
Okay.
Now the . . . this is simply a matter
of bringing the leather over.
These are called folders;
they used to be made of bone.
This is a bone folder, and this is Teflon.
This is much better to work with leather.
This is a pretty modern invention.
But it doesn't mar the leather.
You have to be very careful
when you are working with wet leather.
Especially metal or bone folders can . . .
If you rub it too hard it can leave a dark line,
you know, not only a dent but a . . .
it kind of darkens.
You pull that around not too tightly,
do a little shaping, and here,
I am going to push back
on that little piece of thread
that I have in there.
I think it's right where I want it.
Okay.
Like I said, I don't want to stretch this
too tight because leather when it's wet,
you can really stretch it.
Of course, what happens when it dries?
It needs to go back to where it was before.
So I don't want it pulling too much as it dries.
So I'm not wrapping these around too tightly.
Okay. Turn these over.
I guess before I do that . . .
I should . . . [inaudible]
I'm going to do a little bit of additional thinning
on these corners here and . . .
my hand is going to be
right in your way, probably.
[Interviewer]: I don't want you to cut yourself.
I can move.
[Campbell]: No, let's see, this might work.
I'll just do it this way.
Right at the point of that corner . . .
I'm just thinning it out. . . .
See, I've scooped out a little area here.
So I've got the paper edged in there-
the thin edge.
While I'm doing that, I'll do all four corners.
[Interviewer]: How fast does the glue
begin to dry?
How fast do you need to work?
[Campbell]: The paste lasts . . .
stays wet for a long time.
[Interviewer]: Good.
[Campbell]: Yeah.
Let's go back and do these too.
I cut a lot out of that one.
I hope I have enough left.
Okay, let's start this over again.
As you can see, paste is fairly forgiving.
But it is slippery too,
so you have to watch
that things don't move around.
This is exactly how the corners
would have been done on a binding like this.
No fuss, just thin the leather out a little bit
and push it all together.
Whereas in fine binding, fine leather binding,
there are ways of making the corner
very perfect, you know.
So that the leather molds over
very nicely, no overlapping.
But when you rebind a book this way,
you don't want it to look. . . .
You know if it was real perfect
and real refined-
had handsewn end bands and all that—
it would look . . .
it would be . . . it might look nice
but in a way, it would be awkward,
and we are basically trying to replicate
what was there before.
Just because, you know,
in a way, it's restoration.
We know what it looked like before,
and we have . . . and the materials are not,
in most cases, reusable. So.
That's looking all right.
The edges of the original boards
would have been much thinner
because for one thing,
the boards were thinner
and also the leather was pared very thin.
So these will be thicker and bulkier looking,
but you can try to compromise
with having a big . . .
a heavier leather on there
and a slightly thicker board
with edges that are not too bulky
and too indelicate.
I'm trying to do a little shaping.
Okay.
Now this was . . .
I'll set that thing here a moment. . . .
I'm going to make a little cap
for this text block.
This will just protect
the edges of the text block
from . . . offsetting the leather and
any dyes in the leather and the moisture.
I want the shoulder area here
to essentially line up with the edge
of this board right there,
and that this white inlay strip here
is the same width as the spine.
And they will be connected together, so.
Okay.
At this point I'm just doing
an initial sort of fitting,
making sure it's all going to line up right
and pretty even.
At this point,
I'm going to . . .
make a little impression there.
That's that back cornered area I was talking about.
So you see it's starting to take the form of a
traditional leather-bound book.
Now I've got this right where I want it,
so I'm gonna open the board
and leave it sitting here,
and I'm going to use
a modern adhesive here to . . .
this is a blend
of polyvinyl acetate adhesive and paste
and it's a little tackier
and stronger and dries faster.
And I'm going to use that to attach the inlay to the . . .
to the spine here.
So I am coating both surfaces with a very thin coat . . .
which . . .
there won't be a lot of excess moisture there,
it will dry faster,
and when I put the two together,
they will grab each other.
There'll be two tacky surfaces coming together
instead of one.
Okay, now I'm going to,
again, bring this back over
where it was before, and I can feel
that the boards are down
on the inside of that shoulder,
and you can see about where that . . .
the joint actually is.
Again, we won't be pressing that
into a French joint,
which is what this is called.
But in fact there is a space there.